[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
PETER KEMPTHORNE: All right.
We'll get started.
What I wanted to do
today was to make
sure we thoroughly cover
the theory and application
of regression modeling.
And so to begin,
there's a recap,
which is the theory for, if
we have linear regression,
and we have, in particular, a
normal linear regression model,
then we have these properties
of beta hat being distributed
as a multinormal random variable
with mean the true regression
parameter and covariance matrix
given by the X transpose X
inverse multiplied
by sigma squared.
And we also have
that epsilon hat
is a multinormal distribution--
it's actually not of full rank,
but it's in n dimensions--
with mean 0, a 0 vector,
and the covariance matrix
is sigma squared times the
identity minus the hat matrix.
And with these
properties, we can
show that they are independent
random variables, if we have
the normal model assumption.
So these are independent if the
error vector is multinormal.
And with that, we're able to
get an estimate of the error
variance very easily
from the residual vector.
The sum of squares of
the residual vector
can be solved for having
expectation equal to n minus p
sigma squared, and
that leads to dividing
the sum of squared
residuals by n minus p
to get an unbiased estimate.
Now, what's interesting
mathematically
is that because this estimate
of the error variance
depends on the residuals, which
are independent of beta hat,
we can then use this information
to construct t-statistics
for the least squares estimates.
So we have t-statistics for
the j-th component of the least
squares estimate, so beta hat
sub j minus beta j divided
by sigma hat Cjj where Cjj
is the j-th diagonal entry
of the variance--
inverse variance.
And actually, the Cjj should be
equal to the square root of X
transpose X inverse sub jj.
So there's a square
root missing there.
And this distribution, under
the normal linear model, has--
or this formula has
a t-distribution.
So this is distributed
as a t-distribution
with n-minus-p degrees
of freedom, degrees
of freedom equal to n minus p.
And this is true if we
plug in the true beta j.
So centering our least
squares estimate at beta j
allows us to write that out.
So if we look at
our beta hat value
and consider it around
the true beta j,
we basically have a
t-distribution for the outcome.
And why this becomes
very useful is
that if we want to test the
hypothesis that beta j is
equal to 0, then
if this is 0, we
can basically define
an interval around 0
and consider rejecting
the null hypothesis
if our t hat with beta j
equaling 0 in magnitude
is greater than some
critical value--
say, some constant C.
And so this
t-statistic is commonly
applied in judging
different regression models.
Of particular interest
is whether factors can be
excluded from the regression.
So if a beta j
component is equal to 0,
that means we can just
exclude the variable.
Now, interestingly,
if we want to test
whether multiple beta
j's are equal to 0,
a special case of
that is just to say,
let's assume that the first
k beta j's are nonzero.
We'll just assume
that that's true.
But let's test whether
the beta j's for j above k
are equal to 0.
And what we can do is
calculate residuals
under the two hypotheses.
First, assuming that they're
all nonzero, we get an RSS 1.
But if we assume the
submodel is true,
we can get a second
set of residuals.
And because the
full model is more--
sort of, it minimizes the
sum of squares further, we
can look at the difference
in residual sum of squares,
normalize that by p
minus k, and compare
that with the residual
sum of the squares
under the full model
divided by n minus p.
So this is an estimate of sigma
squared using the full model.
This numerator is
also an estimate
of sigma squared based on the
null hypothesis being true.
Now, what's interesting
to highlight
is that the F-test when k, the
number of nonzero coefficients,
is p minus 1, then this
F-test corresponds to testing
whether the p-th
beta j is equal to 0.
And so it turns out that
if we have t hat p--
sorry-- t hat,
yeah, p, of beta--
of the true beta,
the beta with beta p
equal to 0- this
squared is actually
equal to this F-statistic.
[LAUGHS] I'm just going to--
[LAUGHS] there's a huge
rumbling in the room right now.
And if anyone
finds out that it's
something serious we
should be thinking about,
please let me know, [LAUGHS]
or let the whole class know.
It sort of sounds like an
earthquake, which I experienced
when I was at UC Berkeley.
[LAUGHS] Anyway, all
right, well, we'll
continue, unless I get
warnings from you all.
Anyway, it turns out that this
t-squared statistic is actually
equal to the F-test
formalized here.
So F-tests are very useful.
In special cases, they're
equivalent to the square
of a t-test statistic.
Now, let's see, with the
notes from last time,
we went through these.
We highlighted how, with
generalized least squares--
this is another key takeaway
in regression modeling.
So, so generalized
least squares,
with generalized
least squares, we
have an error
vector, which is not
a diagonal identity
times sigma squared,
but it's some base matrix sigma
times little sigma squared.
And with this setup,
we can actually
transform this regression
model into one which satisfies
our Gauss-Markov assumptions.
And then, so with x star and y
star being the model equation
multiplied by the inverse
square root of sigma, then
this model satisfies the
Gauss-Markov assumptions,
zero-mean constant variance,
and so this estimator,
with the X stars and Y
stars but the same beta,
gives us our best
estimate of the beta hat--
best in terms of minimum
being unbiased and having
smallest variance.
OK.
Well, a next important
aspect of regression modeling
is looking at Maximum
Likelihood Estimation, MLE.
And for maximum
likelihood estimation,
we use the probability model
of the regression-- which,
in this case, is normal linear
regression models, so if we
have normal epsilon vector.
Then we compute the
density of our data Y,
given the explanatory
variables in X,
and the beta, regression
parameter beta.
That should be a beta there.
And we simply identify
those parameter values
that maximize this probability.
So we're looking
at the parameter
values that make the data
we observed the most likely.
And intuitively, that's
maybe a reasonable thing.
If you take Mathematical
Statistics next term,
you'll learn that
that, in fact, is
an optimal estimator, in terms
of having smallest variance
in large samples.
As the sample size, the
number of cases n increases,
this will lead to
the best estimator.
And this MLE for the best--
or the best estimator
being the MLE
will be true for different
distributions as well.
We're going to show what it is
for the Gaussian distribution.
And what we can
see on this slide
is that the log
of the likelihood
is the log of this
density on the top line.
It can be equal to minus n over
2 log sigma squared minus 1/2
sigma squared q of beta, where
q of beta is our least squares
criterion.
So maximum likelihood estimation
for normal linear regression
models can proceed in two steps.
First, we can see that the beta
regression coefficient enters in
only through a
factor of Q of beta.
So minimizing Q of beta
gives us the MLE for beta.
And then once we have
the MLE for beta,
we can plug that in to the
likelihood, the log likelihood--
or the likelihood, for
varying sigma squared.
And when we do this,
we actually can just
maximize this sort
of partial likelihood
with beta fixed at beta hat.
Maximize that over
sigma squared,
and that turns out to be a very
easy computation, calculating
the first-order equation
for the log likelihood.
And we get the maximum
likelihood estimate is simply
the sum of squared
residuals divided by n.
Now, with maximum
likelihood, in this case,
we have, actually, a biased
estimate of the error variance.
And it's important just to
note that that's the case.
All right.
Well, what's interesting
to generalize
is to find estimators,
which minimize
a Q function, which may be
different from least squares--
or sum of squares.
And so we can
consider a Q function
which minimizes the sum of a
function h evaluated at case i.
So let's see here.
Let's pull this down.
So, so with generalized
M-estimators,
we think of Q of beta
being the sum 1 to n
of h of y i, the x i beta,
and sigma squared, I guess.
And the choice of h,
well, if we choose h
to just be the square of the
linear estimate of y given x i,
that's least squares.
There's no reason, in principle,
why we should use squares.
We could use absolute
deviations and sum those.
And if we wanted maximum
likelihood estimates,
we could choose h to be
minus the log of the density.
And there are robust
estimators in statistics.
And these robust estimators
consider variations, basically,
of least squares and
mean absolute deviations
as special cases, that yield
estimators that are robust.
Now, what's, to me, very
interesting is that if we were
to know what the density
is of the errors,
then maximum likelihood
estimation would say use that.
When we don't know
the distribution,
then these others may be
very useful as alternatives.
And robust estimators
were originally
proposed for models where we
may have a normal distribution
most of the time, but
some contamination
distribution with large errors
a small percentage of the time.
Now, and another
interesting example
of this generalized M-estimator
is the quantile estimator,
where we consider sort of
mean absolute deviation,
but we scale that for positive
residuals by a factor tau.
And for negative
values of the residual,
we scale the absolute
deviation by 1 minus tau.
This h function
basically is equivalent
to the mean absolute deviation
when tau is equal to 0.5.
But when tau is--
if we have h--
let's see.
So h of y, x, when this is
equal to tau y i minus x i
beta when this is positive.
And it's equal to 1
minus tau when this is--
actually, it's equal to minus
this when this is less than 0.
Then, for example, when
tau is equal to 0.9,
this turns out to be a quantile
estimate that is working
to estimate the 90th
percentile of outcomes.
So when we have a regression
model and we are sort of just--
if we have a bunch
of points, and we
consider a linear
regression model,
this would be y equal to--
or y hat equal to sort of
the mean absolute deviation
estimate, we actually can get
estimates of the 90th percentile
of outcomes of the
regression model.
Now, what's interesting
mathematically
is, How would one calculate sort
of the mean absolute deviation
estimate, or this
quantile estimator?
Well, we would want to minimize
the sum of these h functions.
And these h functions
actually are convex.
So as James Sheppard said, this
is, like, a bowl-shaped problem.
But it's a bowl with
sort of square--
or with straight
edges around it.
And so if we take this
Q function with this h,
we can't minimize it by solving
the first-order equations.
So if we have Q equal to the sum
1 to n of h of the arguments,
we can't solve this--
we can't solve for
this equaling 0.
But we can solve for what the
derivative is at any guesses,
and we can move our guess to a
lower value of the Q function
with that.
And that's, in
fact, how we learn
that the median of
a sample is the best
estimate of the
center of the data
if we consider mean
absolute deviations.
OK.
Well, let's consider another
extension of regression.
It's famous enough to have its
own name, ridge regression.
And so with ridge regression,
we are estimating the regression
parameters where we have--
basically, it's sort
of least squares
plus a penalty,
for our criterion.
So the left argument
of this expression
is simply the sum of
squared residuals,
but then we're adding
to that a penalty
depending upon the squared
length of the beta vector.
And so in order for this to
be a reasonable thing to do,
we actually need to--
or, we don't need
to, but it's useful,
to consider standardizing
our independent variables x,
making them have mean
0, and also centering y,
and then consider
the regression where
we rescale the columns of the
predictor matrix as centered
with the inverse of the
covariance matrix between those.
So in this formulation,
this is the statement
of how the ridge regression
parameter estimate is specified.
Now, the centering of
the independent variables
and scaling them to
have unit variance
is important because
it places all
of the variables, all of
the predictor variables,
on an equal footing.
If we are looking at the sum
of squared beta j's, then
if we just use
different units, we
could make any j beta, beta
j, as large as we want.
But with this
standardization, we basically
eliminate that aspect,
so there's no dependence
on the original units of X.
And let's see.
With this ridge
regression, the notes
go through how we compute these.
I want to highlight, though,
how this ridge regression is
actually related to
Bayesian models, where
we would assume a prior
distribution on our regression
parameters.
And so the-- if we consider
a Bayes prior on beta,
and that Bayes prior is
basically multinormal in p
dimensions, with a
mean vector of 0,
and a covariance
matrix that is--
let's see, I'll call
it omega, and omega
is proportional to the identity
matrix in p dimensions.
Then what we've done is
we have a criterion that
corresponds to the exponential
part of the log likelihood for--
plus the log likelihood
of the prior density.
So this ridge regression
is interpretable as putting
a prior distribution on the
betas that have this form,
mean 0, and covariance
proportional
to the identity matrix.
And what that
suggests a priori is
that any direction in
that p-dimensional space
is equally likely as any
other for characterizing
the regression parameters.
And this beta hat, which
minimizes this argument,
ends up being the mode of
the posterior distribution.
So that's a neat
connection to be aware of.
The notes here go through,
with ridge regression,
how we compute them.
The minimization basically
leads to formulas
for the ridge regression
estimate that look almost
like least squares,
except we have
this additional factor,
lambda times the identity,
inside that braces, before
we take the inverse.
And with ridge regression, we
can look at the singular value
decomposition of our
independent variables
that have been centered
and standardized.
And when we do that we basically
have this final formula
for the ridge regression.
And we end up basically having
the fitted values y hat just
being equal to a sum
of factors times cj uj,
where these factors
are 1 when lambda is 0.
So when lambda is 0, ridge
is equal to least squares.
And so the least squares
fitted values are given here.
But with ridge regression,
we have shrinkage.
And what's curious
is that there's
less shrinkage for the larger
squared singular values,
and there's more shrinkage
for the smaller ones.
So if we think of the
independent variables,
or predictor variables,
being in p-dimensional space,
then ridge regression
will not shrink
much those regression
coefficients
that correspond to
regressor variables
that are along sort of the
first principal component axis.
And there's much more
shrinkage in those dimensions
where there's very
little variation.
So these are actually connected
to principal components
variables, which
is actually covered
sort of in the next section.
So, yeah, it was--
we introduced ridge regression
using the singular value
decomposition of X. But we can
motivate principal components
regression using the same
singular value decomposition.
So with our data
predictor matrix X,
we consider the sample
covariance matrix
of those row vectors.
And we can compute the
eigenvalue eigenvector
decomposition of that.
And with these
eigenvectors, which
are normalized to have length 1,
we simply multiply our matrix X
by the j-th eigenvector, and we
get our j-th principal component
variable.
So this is familiar to us
in, terms of how principal
components sort of
computations work.
And with principal
components regression,
one has principal
component variables
which are orthogonal
to each other,
and so the computation of their
coefficients is very simple.
We can calculate
them separately,
and we can consider
using maybe just
the first m principal component
variables in our regression.
And so if we do this, we
can see some easy formulas
for the estimates.
Ultimately, we get
fitted values of y,
from principal
components regression,
which are a projection of the
Y vector onto the space spanned
by the first--
in this case, the first m
principal component directions.
And what's curious is just
how these three methods--
least squares, ridge,
and principal components
regression--
are estimating the response
variable, or dependent variable,
using essentially the
same fundamental pieces,
the cj and uj's, but
are either skipping
the last p minus m for
principal components,
shrinking those
based on the size
of the eigenvalues for
ridge, or using all of them.
Now, as you might
expect, researchers
have extended estimation
methods beyond these.
The LASSO regression model,
or regression estimate,
is one where, instead
of having the penalty be
the sum of squared beta j's
or the length of the beta j,
it's the sum of the
absolute values.
And this penalty is a
really interesting one.
And some of-- let's see.
I'm sure some people here have
perhaps used lasso regression.
Has anyone here used
lasso regression?
Nobody?
That's fine.
That means this isn't sort
of repeat information.
But it turns out that--
well, let me just draw this.
Suppose we have beta
1 versus beta 2,
and we're considering penalties.
So the sum of the beta j
squareds equal to a constant,
this is the sort
of ridge penalty.
So, so if we have a beta
hat, say, a beta hat here,
a point that we
observe, it basically
is sort of shrunk towards zero.
Or we have beta hat,
and the beta-hat ridge
will be shrunk towards this
prior mean some amount.
With the lasso penalty,
we have the sum
of the magnitudes of the beta
j's is equal to a constant.
Then we basically
have diamonds where,
along each of these
diamond edges,
the penalty is the
same magnitude.
And so with lasso
regression, we basically
consider finding an estimate
that minimizes the least squares
but also is constrained
to have sort
of sum of absolute
magnitudes that's smaller.
And so this kind of
penalty ends up actually
leading to shrinkage,
which tends
to concentrate at the vertices
of this penalty function.
So what we end up
getting, often,
is a lasso estimate that
has some null parameters,
zero-value parameters.
So it's a way of excluding
variables from the regression,
depending on what lambda is.
All right.
Well, let's see.
There's this ETF case
study that I posted which--
and it's sort of a long
document to sift through,
but I guess what's
important is just
to look at the table
of contents to see
what's of interest
to check out in this.
And what I set up
as a problem was
to consider collecting prices
on exchange-traded funds
that correspond to different
sectors in the US market.
And so in the US market,
there are about 10 sectors--
consumer staples,
energy, financials,
health, and so forth.
And then there are also
exchange-traded funds
that correspond to market
indexes, like the S&P 500
or the Dow Jones Industrial
or the NASDAQ market.
And I consider regressing a
sector ETF on the index ETFs.
Now, why would we be interested
in regressing a sector index
on these market-index ETFs?
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE].
PETER KEMPTHORNE: Well, let
me just go through here.
OK.
Or, this document goes
through, listing the symbols
for all of these different ETFs,
plotting them, and actually
then converting the
prices to weekly returns,
and then looking at how they're
correlated with each other.
So in this example, I believe it
was the Consumer Staples Sector
Fund, that I'm thinking of
regressing on the SPY, which
corresponds to the S&P 500;
MDY, which is a mid-cap index;
QQQ; and the Diamonds.
And if we look at these sort
of cumulative returns of these
different ETFs, here's the
cumulative return over a 14-year
period or something.
Well, any other--
any more thoughts
on why we might want to
regress this, on these indexes?
AJ?
AUDIENCE: The index
return should be--
the entire variance should be
explained by their sectors.
Assuming everything
in each index
is contained within
the market index,
it should explain perfectly
the variance in returns.
PETER KEMPTHORNE: Right.
OK, so that's looking at it
almost the other way around.
If we were looking
at the index ETF
as a function of the
sectors, we should
have almost a
perfect explanation
of that in a regression model.
What can be useful
with this regression
is if we wanted to invest
in consumer staples
but we wanted to have
our investment be
hedged against the market
risk, that is large.
And so if we could eliminate
the dependence on the S&P 500,
eliminate the dependence on
the mid-cap and the QQQs,
then our hedged
investment, we'd be
less concerned about
major drops in the market.
So we'd be reducing
the market risk.
So this is where it
can be very useful.
Now, this kind of
approach has also
been used to try and mimic
hedge fund strategies.
And so there's some
papers out there
on hedge fund replication, where
hedge funds basically maybe
have most of their returns
attributable to liquid market
instruments that one can
trade in a portfolio.
And so hedge fund
replication methods
have actually done that
kind of regression as well.
Anyway, with this,
with this setup,
we can just regress this
XLP on the index ETFs,
and we get this regression
coefficient table here.
What's important to see
is whether the regression
coefficients are significantly
different from zero or not.
And the t-value and
p-value columns basically
tell us that all of
these explanatory factors
are useful here.
And let's see,
when we study the--
let's see.
When we study the
regression model--
OK, we have the R-squared
of this multiple regression.
The correlation of the fitted
and actual values is given by--
or the square of that is
given by the R-squared.
And we can do various regression
diagnostics which are used here.
What-- I'll let you go
through these details.
It's a bit repetitive
from what we talked about
in the last lecture.
But let's see.
We can also model the
independent variables,
or do a principal components
analysis of those.
And if we compute a
principal component analysis
of our independent
variables-- in this case,
the index sector
exchange-traded funds--
we then have a sort of
decomposition of variability,
which indicates that the
first principal component
variable explains 90% of the
variability in these data,
the first two, 97%.
So we're actually explaining
a lot of variability
with just the first two.
Now, in looking at the
regression on the PC variables,
let's see, we can
consider the-- well,
each of these PC variables,
Principal Component variables,
are orthogonal to each other.
So in estimating the
regression coefficients,
we can do so with simple linear
regressions of the ETF fund, y
on that, on each variable.
And so the first principal
component variable
has an R-squared of 0.545.
And the second principal
component variable
has almost no correlation.
And so it's-- well,
it's almost none.
Its p-value is still 0.0518,
which is almost statistically
significant.
With very large samples, we're
able to judge small correlations
as being statistically
significant,
but maybe it's not
practically significant.
And then the third has a
small R-squared as well,
and the fourth,
again, rather small.
But what's of interest
is whether the--
or, it's basically just, How
statistically significant
are the principal
component variables?
And in the sort of
updated example, the--
let's see here.
Well, if we consider
the regression parameter
based on only the
first three variables,
we basically get these results.
Now, when I did this
a few years ago,
it ended up being the case
that the p-values for--
I think it was the second
principal component variable,
was not significant at all.
And so in choosing
what factors to include
in the model, the principal
components regression
approach of basically including
successive high-eigenvalue
principal component
variables in successively
so long as they're significant,
that actually sort of doesn't
include, really,
necessarily, the important
regressors in the model.
So we can have
statistically significant
high-order principal
component variables that
don't have much
variability in them,
but they actually are explaining
significant factors affecting
the response variable.
So anyway, this
note goes through
and additionally considers ridge
regression and lasso regression.
And so with the ridge
regression results,
the display of
regression parameters
is traced out as we consider
different constraints
on the L1--
or on the-- well,
on the L2 norm.
And if we look at the L1
norm of these estimates,
one can see, basically, how
as one sort of decreases
the penalty for the complexity
of the regression parameters,
we get final estimates given
by these ending values.
But if we increase
the penalty on those,
then they basically are
shrinking towards zero.
Although, the shrinkage isn't
necessarily in a monotone
manner.
And then if we look at
the lasso regression,
with a same L1-norm
sort of scaling,
one can see how, as that
lambda parameter associated
with the penalty is
increased, we basically
have the L1 norm getting
smaller, of the resulting
estimates.
And this shows you how--
I guess the third
variable is the first
to be excluded, then the second,
and then, finally, the fourth.
So, all right.
So anyway, so this note
goes through an illustration
of lasso and principal
components regression.
And it also provided
a comparison
of different
coefficients by method.
And what this final chart
shows is the comparison
of beta estimates by method.
And one can see that most of the
methods give similar results,
but using just the first three
principal component variables
gives us very
different estimates
of regression parameters.
So there's sensitivity of
the estimators to the data.
And it's perhaps useful to--
let's see.
Well, it's useful to
consider these alternatives.
With very large sample
sizes, you generally
don't get much difference in
the ridge or the Lasso results.
It's usually in smaller sample
sizes that you get differences.
With the principal components
regression, in this example,
the first three principal
component variables
end up giving estimates,
that are in the yellow.
But if we chose which principal
component variables to include
based on their
statistical significance,
then the more significant
principal component variables
ended up leading to
this green values, which
are comparable to the others.
So this suggests that--
well, actually in this
case, the green values
are equal to least
squares, just because all
of the principal
component variables
were statistically significant.
All right.
Well, the next thing
I wanted to go through
is this linear regression
modeling for the capital asset
pricing model.
And in this note, we first
review what the capital asset
pricing model is, how it relates
to returns on stocks and returns
on market index.
And what we're going to do is
go through the computation,
computations, involved
with an empirical analysis
of this capital
asset pricing model,
and then consider
testing hypotheses
about individual
coefficients, and then
conclude with actually fitting
this capital asset pricing
model to all stocks
in the S&P 500 index,
and comparing the results
of the capital asset pricing
model parameters for that.
So with this, we begin with
basically a description
of what the capital
asset pricing model is.
We went through this, I
think, in our third lecture,
which says that in
an efficient market,
the expected return
of a stock, asset j,
should equal the
risk-free return
plus a beta factor times the
excess return of the market.
And so beta j is sort of
the market risk factor.
And the excess return
of the market portfolio
is simply how much bigger
that market return is compared
with the risk-free rate.
Now, with these
parameters, if we
have data consisting of
empirical returns R for stocks
j at different times
t, different values
over t of the
risk-free rate, and we
consider the excess
return of each asset
and the excess
return of the market,
then this data can be used to
specify a linear regression
model where we have an intercept
alpha j and a slope beta
j for the regression.
So we're looking here at R star
market, and this is R star j.
And we'll plot values over
time t of these excess returns.
And we can basically
fit a regression model
where we have y hat--
or R star jt is equal to
alpha j plus beta j R star mt.
And if the capital asset
pricing model holds,
then the alpha j's should be
0, because the alpha j's--
if we take the expectation
in this equation
with residuals that are
mean 0 constant variance,
then we get the capital
asset pricing model equation
when the alpha j is equal to 0.
So what we can do with
real data is fit this model
and then test whether
alpha j is 0 or not.
And if it is consistent
with a 0 value,
then the pricing
of the asset can
be judged to be sort
of in an equilibrium
described by the capital
asset pricing model.
And so let's take a look.
I think what's
perhaps useful is just
to see the code for
doing these computations.
It's included in the note here.
But if we pick a
particular stock, GE stock,
and fit the regression model,
we basically-- in this code,
the only thing we
need to do is specify
the symbol for the stock, and
then extract from our data
object the excess market return
and the excess asset return.
And then fit that
regression, and we get
these coefficients table here.
Now, in this example,
the intercept coefficient
is the estimate of alpha.
And if GE is being priced
consistent with the capital
asset pricing model,
then that estimate
should be consistent
with the null value.
And the p-value for testing
whether that intercept is 0
or not gives us evidence
supporting the capital asset
pricing model.
Now, the market, the
excess return of the market
has an estimate that's about
1, with some standard error.
It has a huge t-value
and a huge p-value.
Those values being
large, or a huge t-value
and very small p-value,
are not surprising at all,
just because they're correlated.
And a 0 value for the slope
is sort of meaningless here.
What could be useful is testing
whether our beta coefficient
is consistent with sort of the
average market risk of beta
equal to 1, or not.
But here's basically a plot
of the linear regression
model for GE, and
a discussion just
of getting comfortable
with R-squared values
and calibrating our views of
scatter plots to those values.
And then there's
residuals analysis,
that is very important.
As I introduced at the beginning
of our regression study,
we make assumptions
about our model.
And we then, once
we fit the model,
we check our assumptions to
see whether those are satisfied
or not.
And in this case, we might
assume that the residuals
are normally distributed.
And here's a histogram of
the residuals from this GE
regression.
And there actually are two
bell-shaped curves here.
There's one, that's in
green, that corresponds
to the maximum likelihood
estimate of the mean
and variance of that normal.
But there's also a
blue curve, which
corresponds to a
robust estimator
of the normal
distribution parameters.
So, and we just talked a bit
about normal linear regressions
and their being optimal.
Well, they're optimal so long
as the normal distribution
is applied.
And one can calculate
what's called
a QQ plot, of the residuals.
Where the theoretical
distribution is normal,
we can think of ordered
samples of normals,
from smallest to
largest, and pair
those with our
ordered residuals,
from smallest to largest.
And this plot will look
like a straight line
if the residuals are Gaussian.
And the green line corresponds
to the MLE fit of the Gaussian.
Basically, the slope will
equal the standard deviation
of the distribution,
and the median roughly
will correspond
to the mean value.
But what we have is
a robust estimate
of the standard deviation
of the residuals,
gives us this blue line.
And the robust estimate
of the residual variance
is based on the interquartile
range of the residuals.
So the middle 50%, what
kind of standard deviation
would match the middle 50%
range of the residuals?
And there's an argument
that this robust estimate
might in fact be better.
And another way of
evaluating the residuals
is to compute fitted percentiles
under the residual model.
So if we observe an
epsilon hat with mean mu
hat and standard
deviation sigma hat,
we can do the inverse of the
probability integral transform
and get the percentile
of that outcome.
And so it turns out
that these percentiles
should be uniformly distributed,
from, like, 1 to 99,
if this normal model is correct.
And so we can actually consider
different estimates of sigma
hat, from robust to MLE.
And with the MLE,
here's the histogram
of the fitted percentiles.
It's basically
underestimating percentiles
that are close to the mean--
or the median.
And so it really isn't fitting
the residuals very well
across the whole range.
And if instead we consider
fitted percentiles
from the robust estimate
of the variance,
then the fitted percentiles
of the residuals
is consistent with uniform
in the middle of the data,
except in the top 1%
and the bottom 1%.
So it's very possible
that our data
has a non-normal residual
distribution or error
distribution.
And perhaps that
non-normal distribution
could be well modeled
with a mixture model.
Now, OK, there's regression
diagnostics, which
I'll let you read through.
And then there's this
section on testing hypotheses
about individual
model coefficients.
Let's see.
If you have this
on your computer,
you can probably see
it a little better
than seeing this screen here.
But with the normal--
or with our testing of
individual coefficients,
we basically use the fact that
our least squares estimator
is multivariate normal with
mean equal to the true beta
vector and covariance
matrix, given here.
So, so we can make various
tests of different regression
parameters.
So we have the t-statistics
for testing whether a parameter
value is 0 or not, and
use the t-distribution
to judge how statistically
significant that is.
In our capital asset
pricing model case,
we actually are interested in
testing whether the alphas are
zero or not.
And one could also
consider testing for
whether the beta factor
is equal to 1 or not.
1, for the beta,
is actually what
the average beta is across
all stocks in the market.
And so one can consider judging
whether assets sort of have
significantly high risk,
high betas, or low betas,
using a test of whether
the estimated regression
coefficient is significantly
different from 1 or not.
And so with this, I've
basically computed this for GE.
And it turns out that, I
guess, the t-stat for GE,
which corresponds to a beta of
1.083, that's fairly close to 1,
in terms of absolute magnitude,
but it's actually a bit--
it's statistically
significant, according
to the arguments given here.
Now, there are many packages
in R, but one of them
is the CAR package,
which allows one
to conduct tests of linear
hypotheses like these.
And so it goes
through and performs
the same kinds of tests for
whether the intercept is 0
or not.
And in implementing
these hypothesis tests,
this CAR package uses the
sort of F-test approach.
So one has results that give
us different residual sum
of squares and F-statistics, and
p-values for the F-statistics
corresponding to these.
Now, let's see.
With-- let's see.
Before showing the results for
all the stocks in the S&P 500,
there's another note on
regression analysis hypothesis
testing.
And what's interesting
to think about
is we can consider testing
whether a submodel,
a model without as many
factors in it, is suitable.
But one can also test
for whether there's
a change in model
parameters with a regime,
so that maybe there's an initial
period with a given set of model
parameters, and then a
regime shift following
that, where the parameter
values have changed.
And so the mathematical
theory for this
is covered in section 3, and
one can consider testing--
with the capital
asset pricing model,
maybe-- whether there's a
change in regression parameters
over an entire period.
And so what I want to
just go to is the results.
Actually, the linear algebra for
these hypothesis testing methods
is very straightforward.
And I encourage you
to read through these,
just to see how they play out.
But let's see.
What's interesting, I guess,
is, with this change between two
periods, if we consider sort of
an original regression model,
y equals X beta plus epsilon
for a very long period,
we might consider
splitting it up
into the first part, period A,
and the second part, period B,
and have two equations for
the respective sets of data.
And in thinking about
the two periods,
we basically can test whether
the regression parameters
for the second period are
the same as the regression
parameters for the first period.
And we can write out
the model equations
with appropriate matrices.
And then we basically
have an F-test statistic
for seeing whether these
regression parameters are
different or not.
And one can also--
instead of considering separate
parameters for each period,
one can consider a beta value
here for the entire period,
and then use that
beta value together
with the change in
parameter values in period B
from period A. And
so one can set up
the regression
model where one is
interested in whether
this change parameter
delta is equal to 0 or not.
And so, mathematically,
we get F-test from that.
Now, with the GE stock
I subjectively chose
this period split
for A from B. If we
look at the cumulative sum
of standardized residuals
from the regression
model, then we basically
have residuals that are
consistently negative,
cumulating to a lower
value around 2019,
and then later
expanding beyond that.
So this sort of time series
of accumulated residuals
sort of highlights that
there's strong time
dependence in the residuals.
But if we fit the
regression models to these--
separate regression models
to these two periods,
we end up getting highly
significant results
for the change in
the two periods.
There's basically
an intercept, which
is the alpha, which changes
from negative to positive,
and the market risk
basically changes
from 0.773 beta in
the first period,
to 0.773 plus 0.3537
in the second period.
So these capital
asset pricing models
are not expected, perhaps,
to hold over really, really
long periods of time.
And if we wanted
to apply them, we'd
likely sort of choose a rolling
window approach perhaps,
which then leads
to questions of,
how do we decide on what
rolling window is appropriate,
and opens up other
issues to study.
So anyway, so with
that background
for hypothesis
testing, let's go back
to fitting the capital
asset pricing model
to all stocks in the S&P 500.
Let's see.
The code here basically fits
this capital asset pricing model
regression for all the stocks
that have data going back
several years.
So there were, I think,
around 380 or 400 stocks.
And they're grouped by sector.
And we can see how the
R-squareds of the regressions
vary from 0 to 1.
They typically are above 0.2.
So there's some reasonable
R-squared relationships
that are being explained.
And if we look at the
alphas by sector--
here's sort of parallel
box plots of the alphas,
the alpha estimates within
each of the sectors.
And so this
highlights how some--
let's see-- some sectors,
like, I guess, construction,
sort of had positive alphas,
as did computer technology.
Let's see.
The conglomerates tended to
have negative alphas there.
And we can calculate
the p-values
for testing whether the alphas
are consistent with 0 or not.
And this graph here
shows how the p-values
for almost all the stocks exceed
the p-value threshold of 0.05.
So if we can't reject the null
hypothesis of alpha equaling 0,
the p-value is above 0.05.
And one can see that
there's basically
sort of a handful, or
a couple of handful,
of stocks that have
a significant alpha.
And if we use a 5%
threshold, well, we'd
expect 5% of the results to
be statistically significant,
when there's no
statistical significance.
And so maybe these, in fact,
are consistent with the capital
asset pricing model pretty well.
Now, let's see.
One can plot the alpha versus
the beta across all the stocks
and get this result,
which suggests
that when you have
higher beta, you
may get higher alpha as well.
And when you have very low
beta, maybe the low beta
is partly due to a
lower alpha potential.
But this chart doesn't show
how alpha varies by sector.
And so if we try to
look at alpha by sector
we get different fits
for different sectors,
which is too complex, really,
to interpret as graphed here.
But it serves as a
first step at trying
to understand how alphas might
vary within different sectors.
Perhaps interestingly, here's
the beta coefficient by sector.
And here, one can see
that certain sectors,
like consumer staples, have
much lower beta values.
And other sectors, like
computer and technology,
have very high betas.
So in terms of identifying
those sectors that
will have low market
risk or high market risk,
these properties
play out quite well.
And let's see.
In terms of looking at the
top and bottom stocks by beta,
well, we have consumer
discretionary, computer
technology sector stocks are
the sectors where the top 10
betas are.
And if we look at the lowest
betas, ranging from 0.37 down
to 0.18, most of these
are in consumer staples.
Finally, if we look
at the top 10 stocks
with significant
alphas, OK, here
is the table of alpha
values that were highest,
and one was in oils
and energy sector ENPH,
with the alpha value of 0.003.
Let's see.
Here's-- so if we have an alpha
value of 0.003, it's actually--
yeah, so 3-- whatever.
I won't have the extra.
But this is a daily alpha.
If we wanted to annualize this
daily alpha, what would that--
how would we compute
that annualized alpha?
If you're earning
this alpha every day,
it sort of is an
increment of return
that you're expecting
to get every day.
And so if we have 1 plus alpha
hat to the number of days--
there's roughly
252 days per year--
and then subtract 1,
then we end up getting--
let's see.
I computed this.
AUDIENCE: [INAUDIBLE].
PETER KEMPTHORNE: It's
2.12 minus 1, basically.
So this is, like,
a hundred percent.
So this stock happened
to just deliver
a huge amount of returns.
But what's interesting
to see, though,
is that this relatively simple
model, the capital asset pricing
model, appears to be
consistent with the stocks
over a long period of time.
That being said, the more
complex models are warranted.
And the data collection
phase of this, our project,
included importing
Fama-French factors that
are extensions of sort
of the market risk
that can be used in
these models, so.